How would you define a city? It's what you do on a chairy How would you define a city? An inhabited place of greater size, population 
or importance than a town or village That's better, but wrong Welcome to ma Ow! Welcome to Map Men - We're the men
- and here's the map ♫ Map Men, Map Men
♫ Map Map Map Men, Men In the majority of the 
world where it's not Britain the definition of city is reasonably reasonable In Japan, a city is any settlement 
with more than 50,000 people In the USA, a city is anywhere with 
its own incorporated government But Britain, as per ushe, has its 
own special way of doing things Here is a map of all 76 places in the UK 
that are officially classed as cities The usual ones you've heard of are there Liverpool, Manchester, Bradford, Leeds, and so on But among them are some surprising 
and seemingly unworthy cities Ely with just 20,000 people Ripon with just 16,000 people And St Davids with less than 1,500 people Barely enough for a flash mob And oppositely there are some very notable 
places that are mysteriously not on this map Where's Reading? or Northampton? or Bournemouth? The most surprising omission from 
this list is none other than London Britain's capital city is technically not a city Although confusingly Greater London 
contains within it the city of Westminster and the tiny, confusingly named, "City of London" which is not the same as London So what's going on? If British city-ness is clearly nothing to 
do with size, then what is the criteria? What makes a British city a city? I think I know this one I think you don't It's something to do with cheese Let's deal with some common misconceptions Cathedral Contrary to popular wrongness, city status in 
the UK has nothing to do with having a cathedral There are 12 cities without 
a cathedral of any kind and 32 non-cities with a cathedral of any kind Yea University Another common assumption is that you 
can't spell university without city But just as with cathedrals, there are multiple 
examples proving that this is not the case including seventeen UK cities 
that do not have universities Can you name three? "Hard Knocks, Cooper-Jones" Er Ripon, Wakefield and St Asaph Correct, and for a bonus can you also name 
three non-cities that do have universities? Northampton, Reading and Ipswich And that's our bonus word of the day! And it's where you'll be spending an all-expenses 
paid weekend trip to Ipswich with your mother brought to you by the town of Ipswich Mayor In an admittedly nowhere near 
as common as the other two,   but we're going to deal with 
it anyway misconception, just because you're a mayor doesn't mean 
the thing you're a mayor of is a city For two examples Ramji Chauhan is the old-timey ceremonial 
red robe and gold chain Lord Mayor of Harrow which is a dull suburban borough, not a city and Oliver Coppard is the democratically 
elected metro mayor of South Yorkshire, a massive political region comprising mostly 
countryside which is even more not a city The term "mayor" in Britain is almost as 
confusing, useless and vague as "city" itself So then what is the answer? What decides whether a place makes 
the official British list of cities? The surprisingly simple answer is The King In a tradition going back to the 10th Century city status in Britain is granted by personal   command of The Sovereign and 
conferred by letters patent Do you know what that means? I do not The long version is this and the short version is, every city on the 
official list has been put there by the Monarch It's as simple as that On the list? City Not on the list? Not a city So why then do so many people 
think it's about cathedrals? Because it used to be In the olden days all settlements by 
today's standards were rather small With Britain's population 
being overwhelmingly rural cities weren't considered important if 
they were big but if they were powerful Back then, power came from the church Big Cathedrals such as Wells, Ely and St Albans which oversaw large chunks of 
the surrounding countryside made the settlements they 
were in important settlements And so, the then Monarch 
awarded these places city status which they retain to this day But what about all those cities with 
city status that don't have cathedrals? When did the Monarch start awarding 
city status to them and why? In the 19th century and because The arrival of the Industrial Revolution caused 
some towns to turn into manufacturing powerhouses and go through smokey growth spurts By the 1850s the little town of Birmingham 
was now bursting with factory workers and had outgrown the nearby cities 
of Lichfield and Leicester The citizens insisted that 
the Synod slanted system that saw sensible cities for 
several consecutive centuries suddenly seemed silly Well done and demanded that their town be 
given the city status it deserved So the Prime Minister Lord Salisbury decided 
the time had come to change the cathed-rules - Oh excellent, that's really good
- thank you, thank you and reinvented the meaning of "city" Incidentally that's the same Lord Salisbury who at   the same time reinvented the 
meaning of the word "county" In 1889 Birmingham's size 
and industrial importance was officially acknowledged,   when it became the first place without 
an Anglican cathedral to gain city status Confusingly, Birmingham's church 
turned into a cathedral later in 1905 but for an explanation of 
how that works, ask a priest Father What's the difference between 
a church and a cathedral? Er something to do with bishops? Birmingham was quickly followed by cathedral-free 
Sheffield, Bradford, Hull, Nottingham and a slow trickle of other godless heathen 
towns that had recently become large joining throughout the 20th century The list was gradually starting 
to make more and more sense Until 1994, when a completely good 
run of sensible cityings was ruined by the tiny Welsh village of 
St Davids for no good reason Apparently the Queen just liked it The thing that makes this 
otherwise logical list illogical is these pesky small cities that 
ruin it for the proper big ones So can a place lose its city status 
if it doesn't deserve it anymore? ♫♫♫ Welcome back to Stranded with Songs Now, before the break, my guest 
Jimothy Twigg's five song choices to be stranded on a desert island with were The Ketchup Song by Las Ketchup four times and the Ketchup Song Christmas Remix I regret nothing Now as you know, as well as the five songs you also get to take with you 
one luxury item to the island What luxury item will you? I will take Surfshark VPN Literally any luxury item you can think of I will take Surfshark VPN Why do you want to take Surfshark VPN? Because it's marvellous! Surfshark VPN allows you to 
virtually change your location So your browser thinks you're in another country and that means you can 
access content and discounts that are normally blocked in your country So you can watch shows and 
movies on American Netflix that aren't available on UK Netflix There's no internet on the desert island Not only that, Surfshark masks your IP address and keeps you safe online 
from trackers and hackers and you can use just one account 
on an unlimited number of devices You won't have your phone or laptop And it's affordable too Map Men viewers can get a special 
deal by using the code mapmen or by clicking the link in the description below to get an extra three months for free You're allowed to take your wife And there's a 30-day money-back guarantee which effectively makes it a free trial Jimothy Twigg, you've been a weird guest Right, take him away! Where am I going? Desert island But I thought the island on Desert Island 
Discs was only a hypothetical island This isn't Desert Island Discs Hey! Get off me! ♫ Aserejé-ja-dejé Surfshark VPN Literally all you need to survive In 1998, little Rochester in Kent 
which had been a city since 1211 merged its local council with its neighbours 
to form the modern Unity Authority of Medway What they didn't realise was,   doing this effectively removed Rochester 
from the official list of British cities The new Council of Medway 
could have retained City status simply by filling in a bit of paperwork but they forgot, making poor Rochester the only 
place in the UK ever to lose its city status Luckily the Rochesterians didn't have to wait 
very long for a chance to put things right The year 2000 was the roundest date in the 
calendar in living memory, even for trees The government celebrated this milestone 
with a big blancmange, a bicycle wheel, and the announcement of a 
bidding round for city status Three new cities were to join the list and for the first time ever, any town with 
ambitions to become a city could apply to be one and size did not matter The criteria they were looking for were notable features, historic features, royal 
features, and a forward-looking attitude And so lots of towns submitted bids each having to provide a 25-page 
pamphlet and lots of photos explaining why they were worthy The hot favourite to win was Reading - the largest 
town in England with a fast-growing tech sector it boldly ticked all these boxes And the winners of Millennium 
City status 2000 are Inverness, Brighton and Hove and Wolverhampton (applause)
Oh, what the? The national bidding for city 
status frenzy was so much fun the government decided to 
make it a semi-regular thing every time the queen had a party Newport, Preston, Stirling and Lisburn Lisbon? Lis-BURN Oh, Lisburn
Chelmsford, Perth and St Asaph St Asaph?
Wales ran out of big towns Bangor, Colchester, Doncaster, Dunfermline, 
Milton Keynes, Wrexham and Southend And that brings us to today's 
grand total of 76 cities Eight in Scotland, seven in Wales, six 
in Northern Ireland and 55 in England The question we need to ask other than, why did the 
Queen hate Reading so much? is why bother bidding? Submitting a bid is an expensive business with tens of thousands of pounds 
being spent on printer ink alone So what are the advantages of 
being a city instead of a town? Extra Government funding? No Extra local powers? No Extra promotion for tourism? No Who was that? Sorry Typo The clue is in the name: "city status" That's a very good word for it, 
because that's literally all it is And that's why every town 
that bids has a different   justification for why their bid was bother-worthy Preston said gaining city status 
in 2002 put them on the map even though our research has shown 
that Preston was already on most maps Perth claimed that in the decade since 
becoming a city in 2012, its economy grew 12% which would be impressive if it weren't for 
nearby Dundee also growing by about 12% Towns don't even need to 
win to benefit from bidding The parish council of Marazion 
in Cornwall submitted a no-hoper   underdog bid without their bosses 
in Cornwall ever knowing about it They were quickly disqualified,   but not before the subsequent publicity 
resulted in a mini boost in tourism and a mention in this episode The people who seem to get the most 
tangible benefit from the bidding process are the government themselves Awarding city status to an unsung town is a way to appear to show support 
for it and get some positive PR without having to commit any time or money But is this OK? Is it right that the government 
of the day gets to mess with the   dictionary definition of a geographical word? Is it perhaps time we dropped 
this nonsense of a system and replaced it with something more meaningful? Nah The government has 8,007 more 
important things to worry about than what the meaning of city is Once those have been sorted, yes we 
might look at redefining the definition and even then, we probably shouldn't After all, a vague, archaic, 
mostly harmless tradition fraught with pomp and ceremony 
and mawkish self-aggrandising with a bit of royalty thrown in is about the most British thing imaginable and would never happen in a boring 
sensible country like Germany Regular rounds of royal city statusing look 
set to be with us for many jubilees to come So if you want your town to become 
a city, just sit tight and wait and rest assured that at this rate, every corner of the country will 
become a city by the year 3000 And the winner is Newport Pagnell services on the M1 except   Reading